Subject: Re: Standing variation, convergent evolution, and ephemeral divergence.
To: Graham Coop <gmcoop@ucdavis.edu>


Dear Graham,

Thank you for sending me your manuscript/preprint, which I have read
with very great interest.  I have to read between the the equations,
so I might have missed something, but your explication of the ideas,
especially in the Discussion, is clear and very interesting.  I've
been intrigued for a very long time by examples of convergent
evolution within species, but have never thought enough about it to
begin to deduce the possible implications that you and Dr. Ralph
develop.

Of course, I am pleased that you have found my papers relevant, and
you do indeed interpret them accurately.  I'm most interested in the
question you raise about how mutations get fixed between species, even
though local convergence militates against it, for you provide all the
more reason to think that speciation may play a role in long-term
evolutionary change.  The point you develop, that the apparent
accumulation of evolutionary changes at branch points in phylogenies
need not have occurred during the speciation process itself, seems
quite right;  I think you here are extending the time scale over which
the divergence occurs, compared to what I had in mind when I wrote my
papers.  That is largely because I was focused on providing an
alternative interpretation of the patterns claimed for the fossil
record (with few well-characterized examples, to be sure), in which
the claim was made that morphological shifts occur over a brief
interval, compared to the intervals of approximate stasis. I
envisioned (as do some of the later authors whom you cite) that
speciation occurs rapidly, so that the capture of a perhaps rare,
locally and temporally ephemeral excursion would be tantamount to
coincidence of the evolution of both the phenotypic character and
reproductive isolation.  But including ephemeral speciation, as
Rosenblum et al. suggest, loosens the temporal conjunction.

The remark at the top of p. 15, that polygenic traits may be even less
susceptible to a shared genetic basis for adaptation, led me to think
of transgressive segregation of traits in hybrids between populations
or species.  (Dobzhansky-Muller incompatibilities, which you rightly
raise at the end of the text, are a special case of these.)  Rieseberg
et al. reviewed transgressive segregation in at least two papers
(Heredity 83:363-372, 1999; Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B
358:1141-1147, 2003), and found transgressive segregation more
frequently in intraspecific population crosses than in interspecific
crosses, which nicely fits your model.   I think most of the cases
involved traits that differ in the mean between populations, but the
same holds for some traits that don't.  A quick search revealed a
paper by Slatkin and Lande that I had not known, in which they modeled
this case in 1994 (Genet. Res. 64:51-56).

I hope you plan to publish in a journal that is read by many
evolutionary biologists (perhaps more widely than, say, Theoretical
Population Biology), because the issue you raise in the Discussion can
be addressed from a variety of directions, using data on a wider range
of species than you can cite at this time. It is a most interesting
paper, and I thank you for sharing it with me.

Regards,

Doug


Douglas J. Futuyma
Distinguished Professor
Department of Ecology and Evolution
Stony Brook University
